(chore): Add post for MCP first anniversary and Nov 2025 release (#1808)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: blog/content/posts/2025-11-25-first-mcp-anniversary.md

The ecosystem is growing, adoption is growing, but what's underpinning all of this?

### Community & Governance

MCP's growth was never a one‑company effort. Students, hobbyists, startup engineers, and enterprise architects all shaped the protocol - submitting SEPs, shipping SDKs in new languages, and stress‑testing some of the early assumptions we had about MCP in production. MCP went from an experiment to a standard that is used to connect LLMs to both APIs as well as applications (yes, there’s even a [Blender MCP server](https://github.com/ahujasid/blender-mcp)). That kind of organic adoption isn't something you can just come up with, no matter how ambitious your aspirations are with an open source project.

![David Soria Parra presenting on MCP in May of 2025](/posts/images/first-mcp-anniversary/david-mcp-may.webp)

> It's all about the **MCP community**. Our community rallied around the protocol, organizing events like [MCP Dev Summit](https://mcpdevsummit.ai/), [MCP Night](https://workos.com/mcp-night), [MCP Dev Days](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/reactor/series/S-1563/), and showing up at marquee events like [AI Engineer World's Fair](https://wf2025.ai.engineer/worldsfair/2025) to share what they learned and built.

Reviewer: Do we have any photos of a large group of people at one of these events? The current photos in the article don't give a sense of scale / how big and buzzing the community is in my opinion

![MCP maintainers collaborating during a writing session in New York City](/posts/images/first-mcp-anniversary/maintainers-write.webp)

Our approach to governance, while still evolving, proved itself to be extremely valuable. We've been able to move faster on critical improvements without breaking existing implementations, and potential contributors now know how to jump in through formal Working and Interest Groups ([SEP-1302](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1302/) set the stage for this).

![Group photo from an MCP maintainers meetup](/posts/images/first-mcp-anniversary/maintainers-meetup.webp)

There's still work ahead for us to make this even better - process transparency, decision timelines, broader language coverage. I am _incredibly thankful_ for everyone who's been part of this and helped us navigate so many changes in such a short time span.

## The November 2025 Release

> The latest release of the MCP protocol specification ships with a number of highly-anticipated features that came directly from our community deploying and using MCP for production scenarios. People told us what wasn't working, what was missing, and what papercuts prevented them from being able to use MCP. We listened and worked together with our community experts to deliver a number of enhancements that help make MCP even more scalable and reliable.

Reviewer 2: P = protocol already
```suggestion
The latest release of the MCP specification ships with a number of highly-anticipated features that came directly from our community deploying and using MCP for production scenarios. People told us what wasn't working, what was missing, and what papercuts prevented them from being able to use MCP. We listened and worked together with our community experts to deliver a number of enhancements that help make MCP even more scalable and reliable.
```

### Tasks: Long-Running Operations Made Simple

**SEP:** [1686](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1686)

One of the top requests we heard over and over was around asynchronous data processing. For questions like "_How do I handle operations that take more than a few seconds?_" the answer used to be "_Well, you kind of don't._" That wasn't a good answer.

> The new approach for asynchronous operations through **tasks** fixes this. You can now start an operation, go do other things, and come back later to check if it's done. Revolutionary? No. Necessary? Absolutely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tasks provide a new abstraction in MCP for tracking the work being performed by an MCP server.
Any request can be embedded within a task that allows the client to query its status and retrieve its results
up to a server-defined duration after the task has completed. Tasks support a variety of states including submitted, working, completed, failed, and cancelled, allowing clients to effectively manage multi-step operations. A `tasks/list` request is also provided to allow clients to more easily track and manage their outstanding tasks.
```

**URL mode elicitation** lets you send users to a proper OAuth flow (or any credential acquisition flow, for that matter) in their browser, where they can authenticate securely without your client ever seeing the entered credentials. The credentials are then directly managed by the server and the client only needs to worry about its own authorization flow to the server.

I am excited about adding this in addition to capabilities that we already have, like elicitation, because it allows the protocol to be used for a few scenarios that were quite hard to get right, such as:

- **Secure credential collection**: API keys and passwords never transit through the MCP client

> - **External OAuth flows**: MCP servers can now obtain third-party authorization without token passthrough

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **External OAuth flows**: MCP servers have a path to obtain third-party authorization without token passthrough
```

Now that sampling with tools is available, this also means that all of the scenarios below are possible!

- **Tool calling in sampling requests**: Servers can now include tool definitions and specify tool choice behavior
- **Server-side agent loops**: Servers can implement sophisticated multi-step reasoning
- **Parallel tool calls**: Support for concurrent tool execution
- **Better context control**: The ambiguous `includeContext` parameter is being soft-deprecated in favor of explicit capability declarations

As an example, a research server can spawn multiple agents internally, coordinate their work, and deliver a coherent result while using nothing other than standard MCP primitives without custom scaffolding or complex orchestration code.

> ### Security and Enterprise Features

Reviewer: +1

- **[SEP-1319](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1319)**: Decoupled request payload from RPC methods definition
- **[SEP-1699](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1699)**: SSE polling via server-side disconnect for better connection management
- **[SEP-1309](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1309)**: Improved specification version management for SDKs

## Looking Forward

This release is backward compatible. Your existing implementations keep working. The new features are there when you need them.

Looking ahead, we're excited about what's coming next for MCP. The protocol is entering a new phase, one where it's not just about connecting LLMs to data, but about enabling entirely new categories of AI-powered applications.

We're seeing early signals of this transformation already. Developers are building multi-agent systems that coordinate across dozens of MCP servers. Enterprise teams are deploying MCP at scale with sophisticated security and governance controls. Startups are launching products where MCP is the core architectural pattern.

> The roadmap ahead includes deeper work on reliability and observability, making it easier to debug and monitor complex MCP deployments. We're exploring better patterns for server composition, allowing you to build sophisticated capabilities by combining simpler building blocks. And we're continuing to refine the security model to meet the needs of the most demanding enterprise environments.

Reviewer 5: Should we link to the roadmap here?

> The roadmap ahead includes deeper work on reliability and observability, making it easier to debug and monitor complex MCP deployments. We're exploring better patterns for server composition, allowing you to build sophisticated capabilities by combining simpler building blocks. And we're continuing to refine the security model to meet the needs of the most demanding enterprise environments.

Reviewer 5: For the mentions of reliability and observability, etc are there existing discussions or proposals we should link to?

> What excites me most isn't what _we're_ planning to build but what _our community_ is going to build. Every week we see MCP servers designed, developed, and deployed in novel ways. Every conversation in Discord reveals new use cases and patterns. The protocol has become a bit of a canvas for AI innovation, and we can't fill it alone.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
What excites me most isn't what _we're_ planning to build but what _our community_ is going to build. Every week we see MCP servers designed, developed, and deployed in novel ways. Every conversation in Discord reveals new use cases and patterns. The protocol has become a canvas for AI innovation, and we can't fill it alone.
```

![Group photo from an MCP maintainers meetup](/posts/images/first-mcp-anniversary/maintainers-meetup.webp)

Even though this is a significant improvement, we know that we're not done. There's still work ahead for us to make this process even better - improved transparency, decision timelines, broader platform coverage, and so much more to help the ecosystem. We are _incredibly thankful_ for everyone who's been part of this journey and helped us navigate so many changes in such a short time span.

## What Others Have To Say

As we called out above, the success of MCP _would not be possible_ without the broader community of adopters. We're delighted that the protocol enabled so many scenarios across the industry. Here are some thoughts from a few of our key partners and supporters.

> "_MCP has become the natural language for AI integration - connecting everything from model discovery to inference APIs to chat applications. The community has created thousands of MCP applications with Gradio and our HF-MCP server. Having an Open Source protocol that unlocks this seamless interoperability has been a game changer in the past year._"
>

> > - **Julien Chamond**, CTO, [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> - **Julien Chaumond**, CTO, [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/)
```

![Developing on the bleeding edge of MCP servers presentation](/posts/images/first-mcp-anniversary/mcp.webp)

## What Others Have To Say

As we called out above, the success of MCP _would not be possible_ without the broader community of adopters. We're delighted that the protocol enabled so many scenarios across the industry. Here are some thoughts from a few of our key partners and supporters.

> "_MCP has become the natural language for AI integration - connecting everything from model discovery to inference APIs to chat applications. The community has created thousands of MCP applications with Gradio and our HF-MCP server. Having an Open Source protocol that unlocks this seamless interoperability has been a game changer in the past year._"
>
> ✦ **Julien Chaumond**, CTO, [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

> "_The enterprise promise of AI is being realized by MCP’s ability to unify data, tools, and workflows across previously siloed systems As agentic AI is more rapidly adopted, we’re excited to see identity and authorization at the core of a security framework. By formally incorporating Cross App Access as an MCP authorization extension, organizations can have the necessary oversight and access control to build a secure and open AI ecosystem._"
>
> + **Harish Peri**, SVP & GM, AI Security, [Okta](https://www.okta.com)
```

![Presentation on GitHub MCP server at the MCP Night event](/posts/images/first-mcp-anniversary/mcp-night-github-mcp.webp)

We also nurtured large contributor communities on [Discord](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/community/communication) and on [GitHub](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol), helping us debug issues, propose changes, and assist each other in shipping great MCP experiences. That kind of daily collaboration got us further than any single individual or company ever could.

![Audience at MCP Night in San Francisco](/posts/images/first-mcp-anniversary/mcp-night.webp)

Really, the success of MCP in the past year is entirely thanks to the broad community that grew around the project - from transports, to security, SDKs, documentation, samples, and developer tooling, it was all significantly evolved by and for the community.

![Kent C. Dodds talking about his vision for MCP at MCP Dev Summit](/posts/images/first-mcp-anniversary/kent-jarvis-mcp.webp)

> To keep this pace sustainable, we spent some time thinking through and putting together a [governance structure](https://blog.modelcontextprotocol.io/posts/2025-07-31-governance-for-mcp/), like any real industry-defining project would. Through it, community leaders and Anthropic maintainers were and continue to work together to figure out what needs fixing and how to get the right changes into the spec. Our maintainer team isn't there to gatekeep; they help surface problems, align on solutions, and turn rough ideas into actual protocol updates.

Reviewer 4: This is the first mention of Anthropic. If the reader is not already familar with the origins of MCP, this wouldn't make sense. Is it worth calling out the relationship between Anthropic and MCP earlier for context?

## What Others Have To Say

As we called out above, the success of MCP _would not be possible_ without the broader community of adopters. We're delighted that the protocol enabled so many scenarios across the industry. Here are some thoughts from a few of our key partners and supporters.

> "_We believe open standards are an important part of an agentic web—helping models work with tools and platforms more seamlessly. OpenAI has been contributing to the MCP ecosystem since early on, and it’s now a key part of how we build at OpenAI, integrated across ChatGPT and our developer platform. We’re excited to keep working with the community to strengthen the protocol as it evolves._"
>
> ✦ **Srinivas Narayanan**, CTO of B2B Applications, [OpenAI](https://openai.com/)

> "_MCP has become the natural language for AI integration - connecting everything from model discovery to inference APIs to chat applications. The community has created thousands of MCP applications with Gradio and our HF-MCP server. Having an Open Source protocol that unlocks this seamless interoperability has been a game changer in the past year._"
>
> ✦ **Julien Chaumond**, CTO, [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/)

> > "_The enterprise promise of AI is being realized by MCP’s ability to unify data, tools, and workflows across previously siloed systems As agentic AI is more rapidly adopted, we’re excited to see identity and authorization at the core of a security framework. By formally incorporating Cross App Access as an MCP authorization extension, organizations can have the necessary oversight and access control to build a secure and open AI ecosystem._"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> "_The enterprise promise of AI is being realized by MCP’s ability to unify data, tools, and workflows across previously siloed systems. As agentic AI is more rapidly adopted, we’re excited to see identity and authorization at the core of a security framework. By formally incorporating Cross App Access as an MCP authorization extension, organizations can have the necessary oversight and access control to build a secure and open AI ecosystem._"
```

- Multi-agent systems where agents can work concurrently

Tasks are launching as an **experimental capability**, meaning that it's part of the core protocol but it's not yet finalized. Task-based workflow is a tough problem to solve at scale, so we want to give some time to the specification to be battle-tested in real-world scenarios. We'll work closely with the community, SDK developers, as well as client and server implementers to get this right.

### Simplified Authorization Flows

One of the top painpoints from the community when it comes to authorization has been [Dynamic Client Registration](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7591), or DCR. This capability is needed because in the MCP world there is an unbounded number of clients and servers, so doing standard client pre-registration is not always feasible. You wouldn't expect every MCP client in the world to also have a client registration with every Authorization Server (AS) out there, so DCR was used as a solution to this problem. You can learn more about the current approach in our [authorization guide](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/tutorials/security/authorization).

> To use DCR, however, a MCP server developer would need to rely on an AS that was capable of _dynamically_ registering and configuring a trust relationship with clients. If the AS doesn't support this capability, developers would now need to build an OAuth proxy that would perform client registration and them map its own issued tokens to tokens issued from the downstream AS. This is a complex, time-consuming, and error-prone task.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To use DCR, however, a MCP server developer would need to rely on an AS that allows clients to register themselves via a public API. If the AS doesn't support this capability, developers would now need to build an OAuth proxy that would be manually registered with the AS, and support Dynamic Client Registration itself, mapping its own issued tokens to tokens issued from the downstream AS. This is a complex, time-consuming, and error-prone task, and doesn't actually solve the fundamental problems with Dynamic Client Registration.
```

The alternative would be for every customer to provide _their own_ client registration, but that's just trading one complex task for another - now when a user connects to a MCP server, they need to go through their IT team to create a registration, assign it the right permissions, and then configure the MCP client to use it.

> **[SEP-991](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/1296)** introduced a much more elegant solution to the problem - URL-based client registration using [OAuth Client ID Metadata Documents](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-client-id-metadata-document-00) (you might've already seen our [blog post on this change from earlier this year](https://blog.modelcontextprotocol.io/posts/client_registration/)). Clients can now provide their own client ID that is just the URL of a metadata document that the client itself manages.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[SEP-991](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/1296)** introduced a much more elegant solution to the problem - URL-based client registration using [OAuth Client ID Metadata Documents](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-client-id-metadata-document-00) (you might've already seen our [blog post on this change from earlier this year](https://blog.modelcontextprotocol.io/posts/client_registration/)). Clients can now provide their own client ID that is a URL pointing to a JSON document the client manages that describes properties of the client.
```

### Authorization Extensions

To make MCP better suited for environments that require specific levels of control over the authorization process, we've officially introduced the concept of [**authorization extensions**](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/ext-auth). These extensions build on the core protocol and define additional authorization mechanisms that can be implemented by both server and client developers.

These extensions are:

- **Optional**. Implementations can choose to adopt these extensions.
- **Additive**. Extensions do not modify or break core protocol functionality; they add new capabilities while preserving core protocol behavior.
- **Composable**. Extensions are modular and designed to work together without conflicts, allowing implementations to adopt multiple extensions simultaneously.
- **Versioned independently**. Extensions follow the core MCP versioning cycle but may adopt independent versioning as needed.

The first two authorization extensions came on the heels of community feedback regarding some of the most-used authorization flows:

> - **[SEP-1046](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1046)**: OAuth client credentials flow support for machine-to-machine authorization

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **[SEP-1046](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1046)**: OAuth client credentials support for machine-to-machine authorization
```

- **[SEP-990](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/990)**: Enterprise IdP policy controls for MCP OAuth flows (Cross App Access), dramatically simplifying Single Sign-On (SSO) and reducing extra authorization prompts

As we evolve the protocol, we expect more authorization extensions to be available over time.

### URL Mode Elicitation: Secure Out-of-Band Interactions

**SEP:** [1036](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1036)

> Asking users for their API keys, tokens, or any other credentials directly through the MCP client might seem like quite a scary proposition. This is especially critical when you need to connect an MCP server to an array of _other_ APIs, where the traditional client-to-server authorization flow doesn't quite work. Until now, there wasn't a good alternative - you either had to rely on the client _somehow_ getting those credential securely and passing them to the server, or implement a bunch of custom authorization logic to be used from the start.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Asking users for their API keys, tokens, or any other credentials directly through the MCP client might seem like quite a scary proposition. This is especially critical when you need to connect an MCP server to an array of _other_ APIs, where the traditional client-to-server authorization flow doesn't quite work. Until now, there wasn't a good alternative - you either had to trust the client to handle the user's credentials directly, or implement a bunch of custom authorization logic to be used from the start.
```

**URL mode elicitation** lets you send users to a proper OAuth flow (or any credential acquisition flow, for that matter) in their browser, where they can authenticate securely without your client ever seeing the entered credentials. The credentials are then directly managed by the server and the client only needs to worry about its own authorization flow to the server.

We are excited about including this feature in addition to capabilities that we already have, like elicitations, because it allows the protocol to be used for a few scenarios that were quite hard to get right, such as:

- **Secure credential collection**: API keys and passwords never transit through the MCP client
- **External OAuth flows**: MCP servers have a path to obtain third-party authorization without token passthrough
- **Payment processing**: PCI-compliant financial transactions with secure browser contexts can now be done outside the client

> All the server does is send a URL that the client will provide an affordance for. When the user completes the flow in their browser, they will effectively pass the data _directly_ to the server without any extra middlemen or manual steps. Simple!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All the server does is send a URL that the client will provide an affordance for. When the user completes the flow in their browser, the server will get the necessary tokens _directly_, avoiding sharing credentials with the client or other manual steps. Simple!
```

>
> ✦ **Shannon Williams**, President and Co-Founder, [Obot AI](https://obot.ai/); Organizer, [MCP Dev Summit](https://mcpdevsummit.ai/)

Of course, we would be remiss not to mention the _massive_ effort it takes to coordinate the MCP community engagement. We asked some of our most prolific community managers about what MCP meant to them. Here are their stories.

> "_As a community moderator and maintainer, I keep coming back to something [Donella Meadows](https://donellameadows.org/archives/dancing-with-systems/) wrote: "Systems can't be controlled, but they can be designed and redesigned... We can listen to what the system tells us, and discover how its properties and our values can work together to bring forth something much better than could ever be produced by our will alone."_
>
> _What made this year's growth possible was embracing messiness as a feature, and doing our best to solve real problems emerging from that messiness while leaving room for systems and models to advance and adapt. The looseness created velocity, which I watched unfold in a flood of discussions, PRs, and issues._
>

> > _As someone who's merged hundreds of pull requests across MCP repos, I still feel like I'm barely keeping up with this velocity. I mean that in the most positive way. Better patterns and practices are emerging from the sheer volume of contributions and breadth of experience and expertise represented in the contributor community. As a random person from the Internet, I appreciate that pretty much anyone can bring something to the table._

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> _As someone who's merged hundreds of pull requests across MCP repos, I still feel like I'm barely keeping up with this velocity. I mean that in the most positive way. Better patterns and practices are emerging from the sheer volume of contributions and breadth of experience and expertise represented in the contributor community.  As a random person from the Internet, I appreciate that pretty much anyone can bring something to the table.  This includes standout maintainers like [Cliff Hall](https://github.com/cliffhall), who raises the bar for reviewing, testing, and giving feedback, and [Jonathan Hefner](https://github.com/jonathanhefner), who's done the same for documentation._
```
